SOB 23: Produce a System of Two Devices That Communicate Wirelessly/
 Communicate Data Between Devices

Hardware

Arduino Uno (Microcontroller)
LDR Sensor
Ultrasonic Distance Sensor
Breadboard and jumper wires

Software

Arduino IDE
Python
PyCharm
PySerial
CSV Module
Datetime Module
Matplotlib

Files Submitted

Arduino sensor acquisition program
Python data logging program
Python data visualization program
Generated CSV data file
Graph showing live sensor readings
Video demonstration
Project Overview

This project extends the IoT system developed in SOB 22.

The Arduino continuously reads data from two sensors:

LDR Sensor (light intensity)
Ultrasonic Sensor (distance)

The measurements are transmitted from the Arduino to Python through serial
 communication. The Python application then:

Receives incoming sensor data.
Organizes the data into variables.
Adds timestamps.
Logs the information into a CSV file.
Displays the data on screen.
Produces a live graph showing sensor activity.

This creates a complete monitoring system capable of collecting, storing,
 and visualizing environmental data.

Arduino Program

The Arduino performs the following tasks:

LDR Reading
int ldrValue = analogRead(ldrPin);


The LDR measures the surrounding light level.

Ultrasonic Distance Reading
float distance = duration * 0.0343 / 2.0;


The ultrasonic sensor calculates the distance between itself and nearby objects.

Data Transmission
Serial.print(ldrValue);
Serial.print(",");
Serial.println(distance);


The Arduino sends both values in a comma-separated format such as:

118,56.23


This format allows Python to split and process the data easily.

Python Data Logging Program

The first Python script receives data and stores it permanently.

Imported Modules
import serial
import csv
import time
from datetime import datetime

Features Implemented

Receives live sensor data
Splits incoming values
Stores readings into variables

ldr = int(values[0])
distance = float(values[1])

Generates timestamps
timestamp = datetime.now()

Saves information into CSV format
writer.writerow([
    timestamp,
    ldr,
    distance
])

Example Logged Data
2026-07-15 12:01:14.409657,131,10.26
2026-07-15 12:01:15.418125,121,56.27
2026-07-15 12:01:16.426963,121,56.65


Each row contains:

Date and time
LDR measurement
Distance measurement

This satisfies the requirement of logging all incoming data together with timestamps.

Python Visualization Program

The second Python script visualizes the incoming sensor data.

Imported Modules
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt

Features Implemented

Receives live sensor measurements
Stores values inside lists

ldr_values = []
distance_values = []
reading_numbers = []

Continuously updates a graph

plt.plot(reading_numbers,
         ldr_values,
         label="LDR")

plt.plot(reading_numbers,
         distance_values,
         label="Distance")

Labels the graph correctly

plt.xlabel("Reading Number")
plt.ylabel("Sensor Value")
plt.title("Live Sensor Data")

Graph Analysis

The submitted graph clearly shows two live data streams:

Blue Line (LDR)

Represents the light sensor readings.

The graph shows relatively stable values with occasional peaks,
 indicating changes in lighting conditions.

Red Line (Distance)

Represents the ultrasonic sensor measurements.

Large fluctuations are visible when objects moved closer or farther
 from the sensor.

Several very high values (around 1190 cm) appear, which likely correspond
 to moments where the ultrasonic sensor did not receive a valid echo and
  returned a maximum-distance measurement.

Practical Demonstration

The accompanying video demonstrated the full system operating correctly.

LDR Test

When the LDR sensor was covered:

Light intensity changed.
Sensor readings increased.
Python received the new values immediately.
The graph updated accordingly.
Ultrasonic Sensor Test

When a hand was moved in front of the sensor:

Distance readings decreased.
The graph showed immediate changes.
The CSV file logged the new measurements.

This confirms successful real-time data acquisition, transmission, storage,
 and visualization.


Explanation

This project expands upon SOB 22 by implementing data logging and visualization.
 Sensor readings from an LDR and ultrasonic sensor are transmitted from an
  Arduino Uno to Python through serial communication. The Python application
   timestamps each measurement, stores the data in a CSV file, and visualizes
    the readings in a live graph using Matplotlib. Testing demonstrated that
     covering the LDR altered light readings and moving an object closer to
      the ultrasonic sensor reduced distance readings. The graph and CSV logs
       confirm successful real-time acquisition, storage, and visualization of
        sensor data.